---
title: ALU Test Bench Lab
author: "Copyright 2019 Charles Daniels, Jason Bakos"
disable-header-and-footer: false
header-center: "Due: Sept. 27 2019"
header-right: "CSCE611: Advanced Digital Design"
---

## Instructions

### Objective

The objective of this lab is to develop a set of test vectors for a MIPS
ALU, which will be provided. The ALU contains one or more bugs, which your
test vectors should successfully detect. After completing this lab, you
should have the skills required to design and implement test benches for
other SystemVerilog modules in the future.

### Deliverables

* Your assignment directory, packed using the provided script.
	* Your updated `testbench.sv` file.
	* Your updated `vectors.dat` file.
* Your report in PDF format.
* **You will be turning in two separate files, one `.7z` generated by the
  provided script, and one PDF containing your report**.
* Each group only needs to submit once via either partner.

### Specific Tasks

1. *Setup the FPGA tools for your Linux account*
    * (add ``source /usr/local/3rdparty/cad_setup_files/altera.bash`` to your
      .bashrc file and open a new terminal)

2. Download and extract the project skeleton.

3. Modify the `testbench.sv` file to be able to load and execute test vectors
   in the prescribed format. It should be able to load the provided example
vectors, which should both pass.

	* **HINT**: areas where you should place your code are marked with a
	  `TODO` comment.

4. Develop a set of test vectors for the provided ALU.

	* You must name your vectors file `vectors.dat`.

	* You may execute your tests using the shell command `./csce611.sh
	  simulate`. (**HINT**: you can show messages in the Modelsim console by
	  using the `$display()` macro).

5. (optional) use `./csce611.sh compile` and `./csce611.sh program` to run your
   code on the board. The provided top-level module will connect the `lo` ALU
   output to the HEX displays, although you will need to provide your own
   `hexdriver` module (you can re-use the one you made for lab 0). You may
   modify the `CSCE611_lab_alu.sv` file if you need to to accommodate your hex
   driver design.

	* This is not a graded part of the assignment, but is a good idea to
	  practice using the boards.

6. (optional) read the `scripts/test.tcl` script which is used to control
   Modelsim when you run `./csce611.sh simulate`.

	* This is not a graded part of the assignment, but test and build
	  automation are valuable skills to have.

7. Pack up your project for submission using `./csce611.sh pack`. Your
   submission file must be named `CSCE611_<Semester>_alu_<Your USC
   Username>.7z`. Your "USC username" is whatever you log into your university
   computer with. For example, a submission file might be named
   `CSCE611_Fall2019_alu_jsmith.7z`. Please only use the provided script to
   pack your assignment, do not do it manually.

8. Your report should be submitted as a **separate file** from your project
   submission. You should name it `CSCE611_<Semester>_alu_<Your USC
   Username>_Report.pdf`.

**NOTE:** you do not need to fix the bug(s) in the ALU, nor should you need to
change the `alu.sv` file. In other words, your test cases should indicate that
the ALU is faulty due to the bug(s) it contains.

### Test Vector Format

The test vector file contains the inputs and expected outputs for your test
bench.

Each test vector must be in hexadecimal format and comprise 148 bits each (37
hexadecimal digits). Use the following format:

| value     | marker (MSB) | a       | b      | shamt | op    | hi       | lo       | zero (LSB) |
|-----------|---------|--------|---------|-------|-------|---------|-----------|----------|
| direction | n/a     | input   | input  | input | input | expected | expected | expected |
| width (bits)    | 4       | 32      | 32     | 8     | 4     | 32       | 32       | 4        |
| width (hex digits)    | 1       | 8       | 8      | 2     | 1     | 8        | 8        | 1        |
| bits      | 147:144 | 143:112 | 111:80 | 79:72 | 71:68 | 67:36    | 35:4     | 1:0      |

* The ``marker`` field is always ``4'hf`` and is intended for use in
  identifying whether a test vector is initialized or not. The first 4 bits of
  every test vector must be ``1``.

* The field ``zero`` actually corresponds to the 1-bit ``zero`` pin in the ALU.
  It is padded to 4-bits to make the vectors more readable. Therefore, if the
  ``zero`` pin is to be high, the vector should make the last hex digit ``1``
  (i.e. only the single least significant bit should be used).

* The field ``shamt`` is likewise padded from 5 bits up to 8 for the same
  reason. Thus ``shamt[7:5]`` is **unused**.

### Example Vectors

```
    // test bitwise AND with non-zero output
    F_0F0F0F0F_FFFFFFFF_00_0_00000000_0F0F0F0F_0
    // test bitwise AND with all zero output
    F_0F0F0F0F_F0F0F0F0_00_0_00000000_00000000_1
    ^ ^        ^        ^  ^ ^        ^        ^
    1 2        3        4  5 6        7        8

    1: marker
    2: a
    3: b
    4: shamt
    5: opcode
    6: hi
    7: lo
    8: zero
```

**Note**: only the first 4 lines of the above are syntactically valid, the
remaining lines should not be copied to your ``vectors.dat`` file and are
provided only for illustrative purposes.

### Design Requirements

1. You must use the provided project skeleton. Your project should execute
   without error using `./csce611.sh simulate`.

2. Your test vector file **must** be named ``vectors.dat`` and use the format
   described above.

3. You should not add or remove any SystemVerilog files to the project, except
   for your hex display driver should you choose to complete step 5.

## Report

You must write a report. The report should be written using a reasonable choice
of font and other stylistic options. The report **must** be in PDF format.

The report must include the following information:

* A listing of your test vectors, annotated with general comments. For example:

```
// test bitwise AND with non-zero output
F_0F0F0F0F_FFFFFFFF_00_0_00000000_0F0F0F0F_0
// test bitwise AND with all zero output
F_0F0F0F0F_F0F0F0F0_00_0_00000000_00000000_1
```

* A brief (~ 1-3 paragraphs) justification of why your test vectors demonstrate
  correctness in the ALU design. This should be a general, high-level
description of your approach, rather than a line-by-line description.

* A brief (~ 1-3 paragraphs) explanation of the bug(s) found within the ALU. If
  you were not able to find the bug(s), speculate on what you think it/they
might be and why.

In total,  your report should be not more than 1000 words, not including the
test vector listing. It is not necessary to fill all allowed space with prose,
the 1000 word limit is an upper boundary, not a target.

You may include figures, diagrams, drawings, testbench output listings, etc. in
your report if you feel they add to the text, but please be sure any hand-drawn
figures are clear and legible. The entire report must be in a single PDF
document.

## Rubric

* (A) 20 points -- annotated test vectors
	* This category takes into account both the thoroughness of the test
	  vectors, and the clarity of their annotations/comments.
* (B) 25 points -- explanation of test vectors
	* The reader should clearly understand the testing strategy used to
	  ensure the ALU functionality was exhaustively validated.  The
explanation should not include detailed line-by-line analysis of the ALU or
test vectors, but specific edge case may be pointed out.
* (C) 25 points -- explanation of bug(s)
	* (C.1) 10 points -- bug(s) is/are correctly identified.
	* (C.2) 15 points -- the bug(s) should be clearly explained, including
	  your thought process and discussion on specific relevant test vectors
or lines of SystemVerilog code from the ALU.
* (D) 10 points -- stle
	* The report should feature a reasonable choice of font, line spacing,
	  margins, etc. For example, the LaTeX default styling, or 12pt Times
New Roman with 1 inch margins would both be reasonable choices of style. 38pt
Fuchsia Comic Sans would not be considered reasonable.
	* The prose of the report should be clear and easy to follow.
	* The report should exhibit correct spelling and grammar (please use a
	  text editor which features spell check).
	* **The report should be in PDF format. If it is not you will recieve 0
	  style points.**

Maximum score: 80 points.

Additionally, the following may cause you to lose points:

* If the code provided in your submission does not match what is shown in your
  report (i.e. in screenshots, code listings, etc.), you will be given a
  failing grade on the assignment.
* If your report is submitted without your project code, you will be given a
  failing grade on the assignment.
* Your code may be runnot including the test vector listing, through Moss, and your report through plagiarism
  detection software such as TurnItIn. Plagiarism and other forms of cheating
  will be reported to the academic honesty department, which may result in a
  grade penalty.
* **NOTE**: if you wish to instead write a code generator (or similar tool) to
  produce test cases, you may instead include it's source code with detailed
  comments, and a 1-3 paragraph justification and overview of it's design and
  correctness, in lieu of annotated test vectors. The code generator must be
  entirely your own work, and run on the Linux lab machines.


## Project Structure

The structure of the provided skeleton is as follows:

* `CSCE611_lab_alu.htm`: log of pin assignments for the DE2-115 board.
* `CSCE611_lab_alu.qpf`: Quartus Project File for this project.
* `CSCE611_lab_alu.qsf`: Quartus Script File for this project -- this is where
  project settings such as the device, top-level entity, pin mappings, and
  project file are configured.
* `CSCE611_lab_alu.sdc`: Synopsis Design Constraint file defining information
  about the system clock.
* `CSCE611_lab_alu.sv`: Top-level SystemVerilog module for the project.
* `alu.sv`: ALU implementation file.
* `testbench.sv`: test bench file for the ALU.
* `vectors.dat`: test vectors file.
* `alu_system_builder_settings.cfg`: Terasic System Builder settings used to
  generate the project file.
* `csce611.sh`: front-end wrapper for course-specific scripts.
* `scripts/`: course-specific scripts.

You should not directly modify any of the above files except for `vectors.dat`
and `testbench.sv` (and possibly `CSCE611_lab_alu.sv)`, however it is very
important that you not change the top-level SystemVerilog module name, inputs,
or outputs, or the test script will break and you will lose points.  The QPF or
QSF file may be modified using TCL commands, `csce611.sh` or the Quartus GUI,
but should not be edited by hand.
